---
layout: post
title: "Thinking about CSV"
author: mfenner
tags:
 - csv
---

This week some of us from DataCite are attending [CSVconf](http://csvconf.com/) in Berlin, and we are a conference sponsor and co-organizer.

> csv,conf is a non-profit community conference run by some folks who really love data and sharing knowledge. If you are as passionate about data and the application it has to society as us then you should join us in Berlin!

One important reason we are at CSVconf is that providing persistent identifiers for data, which in most cases are stored in tabular data formats such as CSV, is the core DataCite mission. And while DataCite provides a searchable index of metadata for these datasets, the integration of these metadata with the associated data is not as frictionless as one would hope.

The presentations and informal discussions at the conference have been very valuable and entertaining so far, and we still have most of the second day ahead. My personal highlight so far: [Richard Smith-Unna](https://twitter.com/blahah404) talking about **Easy, massive-scale reuse of scientific outputs**.

One topic that I have been thinking about the past two days is how to add metadata to CSV files while keeping the simplicity of the format. Two groups have done great work in this are and Jeni Tennison and Dan Fowler gave presentations about their work at CSVconf:

* **Jeni Tennison**: Making CSV part of the web, describing the work of the [CSV on the Web](https://www.w3.org/2013/csvw/wiki/Main_Page) W3C working group
* **Dan Fowler**: Data Packages and Frictionless Data for Research, talking about the work Open Knowledge has done on defining [data packages](http://dataprotocols.org/data-packages/)

Both groups use a JSON file to describe the metadata of an associated CSV file. While it is a straightforward process, it still feels as if we are leaving the simplicity of the CSV format. And when we generate a JSON file to describe the metadata, we might as well convert the CSV into JSON and put the metadata into the same file.

[Back in Septmeber](https://blog.datacite.org/using-yaml-frontmatter-with-csv/) I wrote about a different approach, adding the metadata directly to the CSV file. The following slides summarize this:

<script async class="speakerdeck-embed" data-id="0485d6ed325144bcb155f771e6bfd842" data-ratio="1.33333333333333" src="//speakerdeck.com/assets/embed.js"></script>
